From the New York Times, [music] I'm
Rachel Abrams and this is the Daily.
[music]
The latest release of files related to
the sex offender Jeffrey Epstein left
[music] key questions about his rise to
power and his connections to the
president unanswered.
>> [music]
>> Today, my colleague David Enrich
explains how he and a team of reporters
worked to fill in those [music]
mysteries and reveal the truth about
Jeffrey Epstein's origins.
[music]
It's Tuesday, December 23rd.
David Enrich, welcome to the show.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> David, I think this is probably your
fourth or fifth appearance on the show
this year to talk about Jeffrey Epstein.
And this time we're having you back
because on Friday there was obviously
this massive file release from the
Justice Department that as far as I
understand it did not really advance our
understanding of Jeffrey Epstein or his
crimes or the people in his orbit. Can
you tell us what you think the biggest
takeaways were?
>> It's a hard question because there were
not huge takeaways and we got lots of
bits of incremental color and detail
that reinforced the deep depravity of
Epstein's crimes and the horrible things
he was doing. We also got some new
tidbits. We saw, for example, Bill
Clinton in numerous photos with Epstein
and his associates, including in a
swimming pool. We saw that one of
Epste's victims back in 1996 had
reported him to the FBI for having child
sexual abuse material. And that's a
decade before we know the federal
prosecutors actually started
investigating Epstein. So that was a
definitely a new development. But for
the most part, there was nothing here
that fundamentally altered our
understanding of Epstein and his
network. and notably also
[clears throat] very little about Donald
Trump whose name was barely mentioned in
these files. And it was Trump's
relationship with Epstein that triggered
a lot of the political interest in this
investigation to begin with.
>> Right. Just to remind people, this whole
file of release is coming about because
of a massive pressure campaign, mostly
from Democrats, but also from some
within the MAGA orbit for Donald Trump
and his administration to release the
so-called Epstein files, right? And that
basically forced Trump to sign
legislation authorizing these files to
be released from the Justice Department.
>> Yeah. It's worth noting that the Justice
Department did not do what it was
legally required to do, which was
release all of the files. And those
files that were released were in many
cases so heavily redacted that you
couldn't make any sense of them.
>> And why didn't they release them? The
Justice Department has said that they
will release the rest of the files on an
kind of a rolling basis over the next
few weeks and that they need this
additional time to be able to properly
review and redact these huge quantities
of materials.
>> Okay. So, knowing that there would be
this sort of staggered release, what
were you expecting to get or or maybe
more importantly, what questions were
you hoping that this batch of files
would actually answer? I mean it depends
on your perspective and what your
interest is in this. I mean I think one
of the biggest questions that many
victims have and many people who have
been focusing on Epste for a while are
are there other men who were enabling
him or participating in sex crimes with
him. And for me and my colleagues, I
I've been working with Matt Goldstein,
Jessica Silver Greenberg, and Steve Eer
for months now to really understand
Epstein's financial web that he wo and
looking at his origins and how he went
from kind of this rags to rich's story
where he managed to transform himself
from a working-class family into an
extraordinarily rich and well-connected
person. And so we were wondering if
there would be any revelations in these
files about that. And we're just
completely disappointed in that regard.
>> Well, that reporting that you mentioned
is what I want to talk to you about
because everybody's been eagerly
awaiting the release of these files,
right? Like hoping perhaps that the
files would address some of these
enduring questions about Epstein and his
crimes. And obviously that did not
happen on Friday. But you and our
colleagues have been digging into a
different period of Epstein's life, one
that preceded the era of his most
flagrant criminal activity that he
became known for, that he was arrested
for. Why was that period your focus? Why
was it important in your estimation to
understand the early period of Epstein's
life? Well, Epstein built an extensive
sex trafficking operation all over the
world and that was really expensive and
it required the support of a lot of
powerful people. And so the question for
us has been how did he get in a position
where he had the money and the power and
the connections to do that. This was a
guy who came from a really working-class
background. He grew up in Coney Island
in Brooklyn. His dad was an employee of
the New York City parks department. He
was really kind of scraping by growing
up and
>> then somehow starts to climb this ladder
which will bring him to the upper
echelons of Wall Street and American
politics. And I think the absence of
information about Epstein and his early
years has given rise to just a vast
number of conspiracy theories ranging
from that Epstein was running this super
sophisticated blackmail operation to
that he was affiliated with intelligence
services. And the period from basically
the mid 1970s to the early 1990s for the
most part has been just a complete black
box. And so our goal when we started
reporting on this months ago was to try
and get inside that black box and figure
out how Epstein got his start. And the
bottom line of how he did that was that
he was an extremely successful con man.
He stole, he deceived, he manipulated,
and he learned over and over again that
he could do so basically with impunity.
>> So where does the story begin?
>> It begins in 1976. Epstein is a teacher
at the Dalton School in Manhattan and he
gets invited to a reception at an art
gallery and he goes kind of grudgingly
in his tongue and at the reception he
bumps into the parent of one of his
students who is impressed with his math
chops. And the parent suggests that
maybe he is wasting [music] his time
being a teacher and instead should
consider a career in Wall Street. And
the parent then introduces Epstein to a
guy named Ace Greenberg.
>> Very big name.
>> Yeah. who at the time was a top
executive at Bear Sterns, which is this
scrappy Wall Street investment bank. And
[music] one of the ways in which it's
scrappy is that it is not going to hire
Ivy League MBAs. [music]
It is looking for what Ace Greenberg
likes to call PSDs, which stands for
poor, smart, [music] and deeply desirous
of being rich.
>> Wow.
>> And Epste goes in to meet Greenberg for
a job interview. And Epste fits the
bill. [music] Greenberg is bowled over
by the guy's charisma and charm. and
apparent math prowess and offers him a
job.
So he arrives at Bear Sterns and he
quickly becomes the protege to some of
the firm's top executives. One is
Greenberg, the guy who hired him, who is
so taken with Epstein that he introduces
him to his own 20-year-old daughter, and
they start dating, which affords Epstein
something akin to protected status at
the firm. And that really quickly comes
in handy because within a couple of
months of his arrival at Beer Sterns,
Epstein's boss, a guy named Michael
Tenenbomb, learns from the HR department
that Epstein had lied on his resume
about having graduated from college.
>> And so Tenbomb summons Epste into his
office, is not really sure what to do
about this because, you know, this is a
very serious infraction. On the other
hand, the guy is dating the boss's
daughter and confronts Epstein with
this, expecting Epstein to lie and
dissemble and deny, which in that case
would allow Tennibomb to easily fire
him. Instead, Epstein says, "You're
right. It's true. I did lie." And the
reason he lied, Epstein goes on to say,
is that if he didn't lie, there is no
way a firm like Beer Sterns or anyone
else is going to give him a chance
without having a college diploma. And
Tenbomb is so taken aback and disarmed
by this honesty that he decides to give
Epstein a second chance. And this is a
pattern we will see repeating over and
over and over again.
>> It's sort of remarkable because first of
all, he gets this job because in a way
Ace Greenberg is like fetishizing his
lower middle class background, right?
Something that would have been a
disadvantage to somebody else is an
advantage to Epstein. He gets his foot
in the door. And then when he gets
caught, he doesn't just make himself
sympathetic. He actually makes himself a
victim of the institution where he's
working, right? Like I had no choice but
to lie. Otherwise, you big powerful mean
Wall Street bank would never have taken
a chance on me.
>> Yeah. And to tennbomb, you know, this is
now what 40 or 45 years later. When I
spoke to him, he was still kind of
marveling at Epstein's knack for
understanding human dynamics so well
that just on the spur of the moment, he
understood that that would be something
that was likely to get him a second
chance.
>> And sure enough, it worked.
>> So what happens next?
>> Well, he keeps his job and he starts
very quickly climbing through the ranks
at Bear Sterns.
[music]
Within a few years, he has been named a
limited partner, which means that he is
getting paid boatloads of money at that
point. Something like $800,000 in
today's dollars. And yet, the problems
still keep bubbling up. I mean, Epstein
was found to abuse his expense account.
He took a work trip to the Caribbean and
charged Beer Sterns something like
$10,000 on jewelry and clothing for his
girlfriend. So, this is after he was
dating the boss's [music] daughter.
>> Mhm. Another thing is that it turns out
that he has been helping his girlfriend
get early access to lucrative investment
deals at Bear Sterns, which is a
violation certainly of the company's
rules if not the law. And he's helping
his high school friend get a loan to buy
securities at Bear Sterns, which is also
a violation of company policies if not
the law. And eventually Beer Sterns gets
wind of this and starts investigating.
And Epstein [music]
is kind of headed for a slap on the
wrist. he's likely to get uh pay a
financial penalty and also be suspended
for a couple of months. And [music]
instead of suffering that indignity, he
decides to resign, saying that he's been
deeply offended by the fact that he was
even being investigated.
[music]
So, one of the many things he learned at
Bear Sterns through this network of
acquaintances and colleagues that he
built up was basically how to act and
behave as a really rich person.
>> Is this like which fork to use or is
this about acting comfortable or giving
off an air of ease in the face of
>> It's both. It is what fork to use. It's
how to dress appropriately, how to
introduce yourself to a member of
royalty or to a senior politician, but
it's also to have the confidence that he
belongs in these settings, in these
rooms with rich and powerful people. And
that immediately pays dividends for him.
A former Bear Sterns colleague
introduces him to a guy named Michael
Stroll, who is a video game executive,
and Epstein persuades Stroll to hand him
$450,000,
which is about 10% of Stroll's net
worth, to invest in what Epste claims is
an oil deal.
>> There's no evidence that any oil deal
existed. And Stroll loses virtually all
of his money and keeps pestering
Epstein, saying, "Where is my money? you
promised me we would get this kind of
payout. Epstein rebuffs him over and
over again. At one point sends him a
pint of crude oil to convince him that
the oil deal actually does exist. Wow.
>> But the money is just gone ultimately.
And so this is one of Epstein's huge
first killings. He walks away with what
appears to be several hundred,000 of
money that he just stole from this guy.
And nothing really happens. And Stroll
files a lawsuit against him. It bounces
around the federal court system for
years. Ultimately, Epstein prevails on
technical grounds. And so Epste is now
two for two. He cheated and lied at Bear
Sterns and essentially got away with it.
Now he's cheating and lying with this
video game executive and walking away
with his money once again with impunity.
And for someone like Epstein, the
message there is very clear, which is
that if you lie and cheat well enough
and often enough and are sufficiently
manipulative, you can make a real living
doing this.
>> So, he's not only learning that he can
get away with it, but it sounds like
he's learning that he's getting away
with it at a larger level and with
people who are arguably within his
social network.
>> Yeah, that's right. And Epstein is
nothing if not a very good student of
fraud and thievery. And you can see him
progressing from one stage of this to
the next and getting more ambitious and
bolder and bolder the more times he
pulls this off and the more times he
gets away with it.
>> So where does he go from here?
>> So Epstein around this time has been
referring to himself as a financial
bounty hunter. basically someone who
like tracks down hidden assets all over
the world. And as it happens, we're in
the kind of early 1980s at this point.
He is dating a Spanish actress named
Anna Obergon.
>> And it turns out that her family has
just realized that they've lost millions
of dollars in the implosion of a
securities firm in New York. And so they
hire Epstein to track down their missing
money. and he pairs up with a friend of
his who's a former federal prosecutor
and together they spend the next couple
years trying to track down these missing
assets and lo and behold they find them.
They're in a bank in the Cayman Islands
>> and Epstein and his buddy charter a jet
go down to Cayman and somehow walk away
with millions of dollars of these
securities. They recover it and get paid
a certain portion of that as a fee. And
so Epstein by this point is almost
certainly a millionaire, which is really
it's a quite an extraordinary turnaround
for a guy who just a few years earlier
was this working-class guy trying to
make a living as a high school teacher.
>> The story of the recovered money though
is also so interesting because one of
the narratives about Epstein in recent
years in recent memory is that this guy
was not actually a financial genius.
That's the thing you get you you hear
over and over again. And people are
like, why would would these billionaires
hand him millions of dollars to manage
when he wasn't proving himself as
singular in any particular way? But this
is the only story I think I am familiar
with where he really provides tangible
value to people in a way that does seem
quite singular,
>> right? And to be frank, it's one of the
things I've struggled with a little bit
in reporting the story and in
understanding the story because Epstein,
he likes to present himself as this
financial genius. We have not seen
evidence to support that claim. We do
see here some glimmer of cleverness that
does set him apart. And so around this
time, Epstein has amassed enough money
that he has gone from having been kind
of chased out of Beer Sterns with his
tail between his legs to now he returns
to Beer Sterns this time as a valued
client.
He's doing lots of trading through the
firm which produces revenue for Bear
Sterns which makes Bear Sterns very
eager to keep him in its good graces.
And so they start extending some favors
to him.
>> Favors like what?
>> Well, one of Epste's former managers at
the firm who is now helping to run him
as a client has a very attractive young
assistant named Patricia Schmidt. And
one night in 1987, the manager asks
Schmidt to deliver some papers to
Epstein's apartment at night. And
Schmidt goes over to the apartment.
Epstein makes her tea, gives her a tour
of his very nice apartment building, and
invites her to come back whenever she
wants to use the building's swimming
pool. And Schmidt takes him up on that
offer. And thus begins a year-long
sexual relationship between Schmidt and
Epstein.
And one of the things we found in our
reporting is that the same Bear Stern's
manager on multiple other occasions also
sent young female assistants over to
Epstein's apartment and that ended up
leading to sexual relationships.
And Epste seems to realize that if Bear
Sterns can use women as a source of
leverage, so can he. And Schmidt, when I
spoke with her, she was very cleareyed
about her role in this and that she was
being used. And the way she described it
to me was that I was his play thing and
Epstein perceived her as someone that's
going to help him get where he wants to
go. And sure enough, we see him start to
use Schmidt for other things such as he
would have Schmidt give his clients and
acquaintances tours around Wall Street,
bringing them into Bear Sterns, maybe
take them out to a nice dinner. And so
Epstein had discovered that he could use
attractive young women was a potent form
of currency as he sought to impress and
cultivate relationships with rich and
powerful people whom he wanted to do
business with.
>> He's taking advantage of the fact that
other people are motivated by sex and
they might do something for him if he
does something for them, i.e. send this
woman out to meetings with them. As far
as we can tell, this is probably the
first time that Epstein has really fully
discovered his ability to use women to
really advance his own agenda. And at
the same time around now, Epstein has
also really cultivated enough
connections and built enough wealth that
those things start compounding upon each
other.
And we will see over the ensuing decade
that Epstein really takes that to the
next level and starts building
connections with kind of the creme de la
creme of American finance and society.
And so he'll build and exploit
relationships with people like David
Rockefeller, like Les Wexner, the retail
tycoon, ultimately with big institutions
and big banks like JP Morgan. And this
is the Epstein who we all now know,
right? is someone who has built this
huge network not only of young women and
girls whom he's abusing but also this
cast of rich, powerful, famous men who
have supported him and enabled him along
the way.
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
So David, you've described a lot of the
lessons that Epstein learned in his
early years that allowed him to climb
his way up the social ladder, that
allowed him to amass great wealth, and
of course enabled his criminal activity
over many, many years. But one name that
you have not mentioned is Donald Trump.
and pressure on the president is what
led to the disclosure of these files
because people want to understand what
evidence the government has about
Jeffrey Epstein and his criminal
behavior and the network in which he
operated. And so I wonder then how are
we to think about where Donald Trump
fits into Epstein's early years?
>> Well, Epstein and Trump were operating
in very similar social circles for a
number of years. basically from the late
1980s into the early 2000s. They were at
times apparently very close friends. And
our colleague Nick Confesori has just
spent months digging into this. And one
of the findings in his investigation was
that not only were they close friends
for years, but they were also competing
with each other for young women. And
Nick and his story described Epstein and
Trump as being one another's wingmen.
That being said, there are still a lot
of unanswered questions about the exact
nature of that relationship. If there
were business dealings between the two
of them, for example, and it is not
clear to me whether there are answers
that are lurking in these as yet
undisclosed Epstein files that the Trump
administration is sitting on. And one
way to think about this is that at the
outset, what the Justice Department has
been told and is required under law to
release are files related to the federal
investigations of Epstein over the
years. And it is not clear to me that
federal investigators were doing a whole
lot of investigating into the men with
whom Epstein was associated, whether
that's Trump or men like Leon Black or
Les Wexner or people like that. And so
to the extent that those were not
subjects of investigation, we're not
likely to see a tremendous amount about
them in these files. But at the same
time, there's also a question of why
exactly Trump and his administration
have been so reluctant to come clean
about what is in these files to begin
with. And if they had just released this
stuff when they said they would back
early in this year, we might not be
talking about this anymore. or in the
fact that they have been fighting so
hard against full transparency here, it
does suggest that there is something in
there that they want to hide.
>> But at the same time, one of the things
I've never quite understood about the
Epstein files, as we have been calling
them, is if there was evidence of
criminal behavior on the part of Trump
or any of these other notable figures
that has been in the possession of the
DOJ across multiple administrations for
years. And so I don't mean to come off
as naive and say like if the DOJ had
evidence of crimes, why would they not
investigate it? But I I just don't quite
understand why exactly we believe that
it wouldn't have come out before now.
>> It's not self-evident that this would
have already come out for at least two
reasons. One reason is that, you know,
it's become, I think, accepted
conventional wisdom that if an
administration has damaging information
about its political enemies that that
will immediately be released. That is
not the way. justice departments have
historically operated. And so it's
entirely possible that a previous
administration's
justice department might have had
damaging information about its opponents
that it kept under wraps because it was
supposed to do so. That's thing one.
Thing two is that it is also entirely
possible that there could have been
reports or suspicions or investigative
trails that were followed that did lead
to powerful men and powerful
institutions and those investigations
went nowhere. Maybe because there wasn't
evidence, but also it could be because
there's a a long history of federal
investigators not aggressively pursuing
cases that involve white collar
defendants. When you have some of the
richest, most powerful people in the
world, it is not surprising and it's not
a conspiracy to think that those people
might get away with it.
>> I guess the reason why I'm sort of
lingering on this is that it feels like
everybody is waiting for another shoe to
drop. Everyone is waiting with baited
breath to see what's in these files and
maybe these files will finally answer
our persistent questions about Epstein's
orbit and Donald Trump. But it feels
like the picture that's emerging, at
least from your reporting, is that we
already kind of know the answer about
how Epstein became Epstein in some way,
which is that he didn't need to be a
secret spy or whatever these other
conspiracy theories that have popped up
in intervening years would suggest. He
just needed to be a remarkably savvy guy
who learned very early on that he could
manipulate people. He could commit
crimes and he could basically get away
with anything he wanted as he climbed up
the ladder.
>> Yeah, I think that's right. And I think
there's been a lot of really good
reporting that has peeled back a lot of
layers of the Epstein story. I do think
that there are still a bunch of layers
left to unpeel. And I'm not holding out
a huge degree of confidence that these
files as they get released are going to
do much of that peeling,
>> but I do think there is still a ton of
important questions that have not been
answered. And I think the Epstein saga
for years now has been kind of a
political roar test and that people on
the left or many people on the left view
it as a weapon with which to go after
Donald Trump. I think on the right a lot
of people view this as a vehicle to
attack kind of liberal globalist
institutions and individuals. And I
think the truth is probably somewhere in
the middle, right? That there are a lot
of very rich powerful men who enabled
Epstein and may have participated in
some of his crimes. I do not think that
there has been very much accountability
for those men yet. And I don't think
that we have a full sense of what
information may or may not be in these
government files pertaining to those
men. But I think the reason people think
that there may be more shoes to drop,
it's partly that their dreams of having
their political enemies crushed by the
Epstein scandal remain unfulfilled. But
it's also partly of recognition that
there were so many people involved in
supporting Epstein and allowing his
criminal network to prosper
>> that it just doesn't feel right that
only two people, Jeffrey Epste and his
associate Gain Maxwell have really been
held to account for this so far. Okay,
but speaking of being held accountable,
I do wonder if that's the takeaway here
because on the one hand, obviously
Jeffrey Epstein died in a jail cell. On
the other hand, he got away with
horrific crimes and amassed so much
money and power over the years. We've
been talking this whole conversation
about the lessons that Epstein learned
in order to do that, but I do wonder
what lessons we as the public should
learn looking at Epstein's story and how
he came to an end.
Well, look, dying in a jail cell is no
one's idea of a happy ending. That said,
the story of Epstein is really one of
impunity, and he, as you said, got away
with this for years, despite repeated
red flags, despite many warnings,
despite many victims coming forward and
trying to blow the whistle on him. And
to me, it's also a broader story of
impunity. Not just about Jeffrey
Epstein, but the people around him, many
of whom really have not had a public
reckoning about the roles they play in
this.
[music]
The reason that people remain obsessed
about Epstein to a large degree, I
think, is that there are so many people
out there [music] who have not had a
similar public reckoning. And so to me,
that's the great takeaway that for
people with a lot of money and power and
connections, they really can act with
impunity.
[music]
>> David Enrich, thank you so much.
>> Thanks for having [music] me.
>> Late on Monday night, the Department of
Justice released more files related to
the investigation of Jeffrey Epstein.
[music]
The documents contained hundreds of
references to President Trump, although
most of them are from media reports,
unverified tips, and [music] discussions
among investigators, including a mention
that Trump was a passenger on Epstein's
private jet [music] eight times between
1993 and 1996.
None of the mentions appear to be
evidence of wrongdoing.
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
[music]
President Trump announced on Monday that
the Navy would build two new quote
[music] Trump class battleships with the
eventual goal of acquiring 25. The move
was the latest example of the president
rebranding an aspect of the federal
government in his image.
The announcement also comes as the US
has ratcheted up its threats against
[music] Venezuela's President Nicholas
Maduro and intercepted tankers that
serve the country's oil industry.
[music] And in a move that prompted
criticism from a veteran correspondent,
[music] CBS News abruptly removed a
segment about El Salvador's notorious
SECOT prison [music] from an episode of
60 Minutes after the network's new
chief, Barry Weiss, said the segment
needed additional [music] reporting. The
decision drew condemnation inside and
outside the network where critics of
Weiss saw [music] the move as evidence
that the network was more interested in
cowtowing to the Trump administration
than preserving its journalistic [music]
integrity.
Today's episode was produced by Claire
Tennis, [music]
Olivia Nat, and Mary Wilson. It was
edited by Devon Taylor and Lexi Dio.
contains [music] music by Leah Sha
Demoron, Alicia Bitube, and Marian
Lozano, and was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley.
[music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow. [music]